Hi guys and welcome back.
In this video we're going to start learning
about TkInter by building a simple Hello World app.
What to do is right click your folder
and create a new Python file
I'm gonna call it app.py as I usually do
for these smaller apps
and we're going to do import TkInter as tk.
This is a alias import
it's essentially the same thing as we did last time
only now instead of TkInter dot stuff
We're gonna do tk dot stuff.
And so this just renames TkInter into tk
so it's a little bit easier to use
and this is something that you'll encounter
in TkInter code all the time.
However, we're also going to use a sub module of TkInter
so frequently that we want to import it separately as well.
So we will do from TkInter import ttk
Now, TkInter has had a bad rep in the Python community
and generally in everybody's minds for a long time
because it has been not the prettiest to look at
it is a little bit confusing
and generally it hasn't been all that good.
And over time people have migrated to other
graphical user interface libraries.
In the last few years TkInter has gotten much better
and with the introduction of ttk
as well as many other improvements
it is now what I would say is the best option
for learning graphical user interface
and developing cross platform interfaces
for your applications.
In addition TkInter is very fast
and it's not that difficult to learn
once you've got a few fundamentals down
so let's get started.
We're going to create a simple function called greet
and it's going to print hello world
so nothing new here
if we call this function in our code and we run app.py
as usual you will get hello world printed down there.
Now what we're gonna do is we're going to create
a button inside a window and when you click the button
this function will be called.
So, the first thing to do is to create
our TkInter application.
Essentially, a container for all our other components
like buttons and texts and things like that.
Usually call this the root.
So you define it by creating a Tk object
that comes from the TkInter package.
Then you can give this a title
this will be the title of the window.
Finally if you do root dot main loop
that is going to run your window
and the programme, the code will be paused in this line
until the window exits.
So whenever you run this
your entire Python programme comes to a standstill
or so it would seem
while TkInter is in its event loop.
Let me run this and actually I will call the greet function
underneath this line as well to show you what happens.
Now I'm gonna run app.py
and you'll see this little window appear
which doesn't contain anything
the window may be different sizes
depending on your screen and so on
but you can see down at the bottom left
that there is no hello world being printed out.
That is because right now TkInter
has taken control of Python.
If there were buttons or labels or input fields
in this application
they would all work because TkInter
is the one controlling them
but the rest of our application is stopped
so we cannot run any alternate code
at the same time, as we run our TkInter code.
If we stop this then hello world gets printed out
and our application ends.
Now when we're defining TkInter applications
we're going to wire the different components
such as buttons to functions in our code
that is how our code runs.
So let's do that just now.
Will we create a greet button
which is a ttk dot button.
Notice that this is not a traditional tk dot button
it is a themed TkInter button.
This is the new type of widgets
that allow much more customization
and is one of the reasons why TkInter is better now
than it used to be in the past.
The first parameter to any of these components
is who the parent is or where the button will go inside of.
So this button we wanna put it inside the root
which is our main container.
So that is the first argument to the constructor.
Next up, we can give it some text
which is what will be contained inside the button.
And finally we can give it a command
and this is a callable function that will run
when the button is clicked
so here we're gonna put our greet function.
Make sure to not put the result
of calling the greet function
as then it would run immediately and you would get an error
you do want the function itself in there.
Now when the button is clicked
this command function will be executed
which will run your greet function.
Next thing we're gonna put this button inside our root
because if we run this just now
you will see that the button is not in there.
The root is the parent of the button
but we've not placed it in there yet
so we need to give TkInter some information
as to where we want this to appear.
And we're gonna tell TkInter
that we just wanna put the button in the screen
wherever it fits.
And for that we use greet button dot pack
and we are gonna give it side of left fill of x
and expand equal true.
Now that we've got this we can press play
and you'll see the greet button appears
and expands as you make the window grow
that is this fill x and expand true in action.
We will explain more on them later on.
As you click the button
Hello World appears on the bottom left.
We also have this greet call down here
we're gonna remove it now since we don't need it any more.
Next we're going to create a quit button
and this is gonna be a another ttk button
also on the root.
The text is going to be quit
and the command is gonna be root dot destroy.
Again, make sure to not call root dot destroy like that
because that would actually terminate your application.
Root dot destroy is the function you call
when you want to preemptively destroy your application
when an interaction happens.
Next we also have to pack this button into our root
so we will say quit button dot pack
and we will say side equal left, fill equal x
expand equal true.
So same thing as before
and now we can press play
and you can see that both buttons appear here.
You've got your greet button that prints hello world
and your quit button that makes the application terminate.
Again, I understand that pack can be a bit confusing
we're going to look at it in detail
in the coming videos, don't worry about it.
We have created our first TkInter application
where we can print hello world
or we can terminate the application
we have learned about creating buttons
creating the main container window
and linking commands or functions to our buttons.
These are very important fundamentals
of creating TkInter applications.
Thanks for joining me in this video
and see you on the next one.